---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/1/
type: stop
section_title: Introduction
title: Welcome to the Museum of Forbidden Technologies
page_rank: 1
stop_id: 1
audio_file: NASA_main_APU_Shutdown.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 01-introduction-01.jpg
   alt_text: First example photo for stop 1
 - path: 01-introduction-02.jpg
   alt_text: Second example photo for stop 1
---

Welcome to the Traveling Installation for the Museum of Forbidden Technologies - your presence has been noted. Please take a guidebook as you explore the five objects on display. You may notice that the objects are shrouded with burlap, and explanatory plaques have been partially blacked out. When it comes to surveillance, the knowledge of its practice, usage, and existence is strictly prohibited.

This exhibit, as explained in the guidebook, is designed to bring awareness to the ways in which the digital surveillance is a constant in current-day United States. Computing technology exacerbates the surveillance experience, and assists it in infiltrating multiple domains of our lives - from work, to school, to home, to the world. What is forbidden is trying to circumvent it, problematize it, and acknowledge the ways it refracts our experience. Through this audio guide & guidebook, we highlight the ways surveillance and surveillance technologies have been defined, acknowledged, resisted, and occasionally addressed. Welcome to the Museum of Forbidden Technologies.

### Resources
This project is inspired by places mention in [Welcome to Night Vale](http://www.welcometonightvale.com/), a twice-monthly podcast in the style of community updates for the small desert town of Night Vale, featuring local weather, news, announcements from the Sheriff's Secret Police, mysterious lights in the night sky, dark hooded figures with unknowable powers, and cultural events. Welcome to Night Vale is part of the Night Vale Presents network.
