---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/4/
type: stop
section_title: Surveillance Capitalism
title: Surveillance Capitalism
page_rank: 4
stop_id: 4
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp3
hero_images:
hero_images:
---

## Panel Text
We are also subject to laws and regulations that dictate whether, how, and under what circumstances we can transfer, process and/or receive certain data that is critical to our operations, including data shared between countries or regions in which we operate and data shared among our products and services...

These laws and regulations, as well as any associated inquiries or investigations or any other government actions, may be costly to comply with and may delay or impede the development of new products, result in negative publicity, increase our operating costs, require significant management time and attention, and subject us to remedies that may harm our business, including fines or demands or orders that we modify or cease existing business practices.

*Facebook Inc., Form 10-Q, United States Securities and Exchange Commission For the quarterly period ended June 30, 2018*


## Transcript

Facebook's disapproval of "laws and regulations" in this quote signify all that is inherent in surveillance capitalism. 

Late-stage capitalism thrives on the “surveillance capitalism” model. Coined by social psychologist Shoshana Zuboff, the term refers to the processes through which companies monitor, analyze, and influence users through digital tracking of purchases, web searches, and other personal data, converted into behavioral data. Users’ data is then used to predict and influence future markets. Surveillance becomes not about automating the information flow about the user, but automating the user. Like most forms of surveillance, users wouldn’t support these policies at face value. Rather, the actual methods and mechanisms for how surveillance capitalism works have been obscured from public view. This automated behavior bypasses our awareness, and we don’t know how it works. There aren’t easy ways to resist surveillance capitalism - but as Zuboff notes, “naming and taming” these tools is the first step to curbing it. As Zuboff noted, “demanding privacy from surveillance capitalists or lobbying for an end to commercial surveillance on the internet...it’s like asking a giraffe to shorten its neck or a cow to give up chewing. These demands are existential threats that violate the basic mechanisms of the entity’s survival.”

### Definition
**surveillance capitalism**: the unilateral claiming of private human experience as free raw material for translation into behavioral data. (Zuboff 2018)

### Resources
