---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/5/
type: stop
section_title: Museum of Forbidden Technologies
title: School Surveillance
page_rank: 5
stop_id: 5
audio_file: 5.m4a
hero_images:
---

## Panel Text

My son or daughter is a good kid, so why the big safety concern?
We’re parents, too. We believe that all kids are good, but good kids can make poor decisions. If they make bad choices, and we can help schools identify those students—kids that are hurt or are sad, but might be afraid to ask for help, or don't know how to ask for help—then we can all sleep better knowing that our children are safe.

You are invading my child’s privacy. Well, aren’t you?
Most educators and attorneys will tell you that when your child is using school-provided technology, there should be no expectation of privacy. In fact, your child’s school is legally required by federal law (Children’s Internet Protection Act) to protect children from accessing obscene or harmful content over the Internet.


*Frequently Asked Questions: For Parents FAQ Page, Gaggle, July 21, 2019.*

## Transcript

Spaces of public education are formative for youth. In addition to specific curricula, school is a place where students are introduced to societal norms and culture. As fear for student safety increases, security technologies attempt to provide solutions to these problems. But surveillance goes further than security measures. wWat does this constant monitoring and micromanagement - like the security state of on-site police officers and metal detectors, or the mining of student data via performance audits or monitoring play Internet usage  - teach students about the social control at the heart of these institutions? Students are hypersensitive and aware of the systems around them, increasing distrust and alienation. Students value trust, privacy, anonymity and freedom of expression and movement.

Gaggle is one of several companies focused on student safety and security, focusing its efforts of digital communication to monitor student interactions on school-provided learning management systems and software. But students intentionally test the boundaries of technological social control. Students protest. Students play. They physically hide their use of “forbidden” tech in a pocket or under a desk. They create networks of sharing, passing WiFi passwords between each other when a student obtains unrestricted access. For fingerprinting technologies, they have created “gummy” fingers with artificial prints to protect each other.  

Whether through false conformity, physical or virtual concealment, countersurveiling, or hacking, students develop forms of resistance in constructing an educational experience. In their playful subversion of the school system, students challenge the legitimacy of surveillance systems.

### Definition
**surveillance schools**: characterized by an array of routine practices that identify, verify, categorize and track students, on and off school property (Taylor 2012)


### Resources
- Hope, Andrew. "CCTV, school surveillance and social control". British Educational Research Journal, 35, 6, 02 January 2013. https://doi.org/10.1080/01411920902834233
- Hope, Andrew. "Seductions of Risk, Social Control, and Resistance to School Surveillance" in Monahan, Torin, and Rodolfo D. Torres, eds. *Schools Under Surveillance: Cultures of Control in Public Education.* Rutgers University Press, 2010. http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt5hj93f.
- Foresman, Betsy. "'Support not surveillance' say NY high school students in protest".
- https://ww2.kqed.org/lowdown/wp-content/uploads/sites/26/2017/12/Facial-Recognition-lesson-plan-1.pdf
- https://www.palgrave.com/gp/book/9781137308856
- https://www.researchgate.net/publication/284495395_The_Rise_of_the_Surveillance_School
